nftables kube-proxy blog post for 1.33 (#49393)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2025-XX-XX-nftables-kube-proxy/index.md

---
layout: blog
title: "NFTables mode for kube-proxy"
date: 2024-08-21
slug: nftables-kube-proxy
author: >
  Dan Winship (Red Hat)
---

A new nftables mode for kube-proxy was introduced as an alpha feature
in Kubernetes 1.29. Currently in beta, it will officially be GA as of
1.33. The new mode fixes long-standing performance problems with the
iptables mode and is now recommended for most users running on systems

> with reasonably-recent kernels. (For compatibility reasons, even once

Reviewer: can we offer a hint of what reasonable-recent means? 5.x?

        # element in the map. (This rule says, "construct a tuple from the
        # destination IP address, layer 4 protocol, and destination port; look
        # that tuple up in "service-ips"; and if there's a match, execute the
        # associated verdict.)
	chain services {
		ip daddr . meta l4proto . th dport vmap @service-ips
	}

        ...
}
```

Since there's only a single rule, with a roughly **O(1)** map lookup,
packet processing time is more or less constant regardless of cluster
size, and the best/average/worst cases are very similar:

![kube-proxy nftables first packet latency, at various percentiles, in clusters of various sizes (raw data available at link below)](nftables-only.svg)

But note the huge difference in the vertical scale between the
iptables and nftables graphs! In the clusters with 5000 and 10,000
services, the average (p50) latency for nftables is about the same as
the best-case (p01) latency for iptables. In the 30,000 service
cluster, the _worst-case_ latency for nftables manages to beat out the
_best-case_ latency for iptables by a few microseconds! We can combine
the two graphs, but you may have to squint to see the nftables
results!:

> ![kube-proxy iptables-vs-nftables first packet latency, at various percentiles, in clusters of various sizes](iptables-vs-nftables.png)

Reviewer 2: I think this link should be `.svg`?

## Why NFTables? Part 2: Control Plane Latency

While the improvements to data plane latency in large clusters are
great, there's another problem with iptables kube-proxy that often
keeps users from even being able to grow their clusters to that size:
the time it takes kube-proxy to program new iptables rules when
services and endpoints change.

With both iptables and nftables, the total size of the "ruleset" as a
whole (actual "rules", plus associated data) is **O(n)** in the combined
number of services and endpoints. Originally, the iptables backend would
rewrite every rule on every update, and with tens of thousands of
services, this could grow to be hundreds of thousands of iptables rules.
Starting in Kubernetes 1.26, we began improving kube-proxy so that it
could skip updating _most_ of the unchanged rules in each update, but
the limitations of `iptables-restore` as an API meant that it was still
always necessary to send an update that's **O(n)** in the number of
services (though with a noticeably smaller constant than it used to be).
Even with those optimizations, it can still be necessary to make use of
kube-proxy's `minSyncPeriod` config option to ensure that it doesn't

> spend every waking second trying to push iptables updates.

Reviewer: people not familiar with this option may not understand what this means, maybe one sentence introducing the concept of `minSyncPeriod` will help, `kube-proxy resyncs all the iptables rule every period defined by the configuraiton option `minsSyncPeriod`, even with those optimizations, you may need to bump the minSyncPeriod ...`

Author: The point here is "you don't need to set `minSyncPeriod` with nftables", so if they didn't know what it was before, they don't need to know now.

The nftables APIs allow for doing much more incremental updates, and
when kube-proxy in nftables mode does an update, the size of the

> update is only **O(n)** in the number of _changed_ services and

Reviewer: maybe a parenthesis or something to clarify this is about the number of "changed" services and the other on the total number of services ... `__changed__ vs total` ?

endpoints. The fact that the nftables API allows each nftables-using
component to have its own private table also means that there is no
global lock contention between components like with iptables. As a
result, kube-proxy's nftables updates can be done much more
efficiently than with iptables.

> (Unfortunately I don't have cool graphs for this part.)

Reviewer 2: there was one comparison I've done for programming time https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1WMNZApX8HDHbi7ZnUFuy86UUYov22mBj/edit#slide=id.g30c6bb99704_1_0 
not much data, but maybe still useful?

## Why _not_ NFTables?

All that said, there are a few reasons why you might not want to jump
right into using the nftables backend for now.

First, while kube-proxy's nftables mode behaves very similarly to the
iptables mode at a high level (since both APIs speak to the same
underlying kernel subsystem), it's still possible that some existing
network plugins that work with kube-proxy in iptables mode might not
work right with it in nftables mode; you should consult the
documentation (or forums, bug tracker, etc.) for your network plugin to
see if it supports nftables mode. (Note that some plugins may not need
any changes; as long as they don't try to directly interact with or
override kube-proxy's iptables rules, they shouldn't care whether
kube-proxy is using iptables or nftables.)

Second, the nftables mode will not work on older Linux distributions;

> currently it requires a 5.13 or newer kernel. Additionally, because of

Reviewer: I see , you have it here https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/49393/files#r1913406303

bugs in early versions of the `nft` command line tool, you should not
run kube-proxy in nftables mode on nodes that have a pre-"1.0.0" version
of `nft` in the host filesystem (or else kube-proxy's use of nftables
may interfere with other uses of nftables on the system).

Finally, kube-proxy in nftables mode is intentionally not 100%
compatible with kube-proxy in iptables mode, because some of iptables

> mode's legacy behaviors are inherently less efficient or less secure.

Reviewer: I would phrase it differently as this reads negative, and you explain this always very well as "since iptables-mode was GA for a long time, there are certain behaviors we wanted to change but we couldnt because they will break compatibility, however, nftables mode allowed us to make this modifications to improve this behaviors at the cost of breaking compatibility between different proxy modes"

## Trying out NFTables Mode

Ready to try it out? In Kubernetes 1.31 and later, you just need to
pass `--proxy-mode nftables` to kube-proxy (or set `mode: nftables` in
your kube-proxy config file).

If you are using kubeadm to set up your cluster, the kubeadm
documentation explains [how to pass a `KubeProxyConfiguration` to
`kubeadm init`]. You can also [deploy nftables-based clusters with
`kind`].

You can also convert existing clusters from iptables (or ipvs) mode to
nftables by updating the kube-proxy configuration and restarting the
kube-proxy pods. (You do not need to reboot the nodes: when restarting
in nftables mode, kube-proxy will delete any existing iptables or ipvs
rules, and likewise, if you later revert back to iptables or ipvs
mode, it will delete any existing nftables rules.)

[how to pass a `KubeProxyConfiguration` to `kubeadm init`]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/control-plane-flags/#customizing-kube-proxy
[deploy nftables-based clusters with `kind`]: https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/configuration/#kube-proxy-mode

## Future Plans

> As mentioned above, while nftables is now the _best_ kube-proxy mode,

Reviewer 2: I would love to fix or at least get some fresh data on kube-proxy restart time (which is where it may not be the best yet). I am going to do that before 1.33, so maybe we can update this post later with the fresh data, or ignore this part completely?

it is not the _default_, and we do not yet have a plan for changing
that. We will continue to support the iptables mode for a long time.

> The future of the IPVS mode of kube-proxy is less certain: its main

Reviewer: yes, we should start to create awareness

advantage over iptables was that it was faster, but certain aspects of
the IPVS architecture and APIs were awkward for kube-proxy's purposes
(for example, the fact that the `kube-ipvs0` device needs to have
_every_ service IP address assigned to it), and some parts of
Kubernetes service proxying semantics were difficult to implement
using IPVS (particularly the fact that some services had to have
different endpoints depending on whether you connected to them from a
local or remote client). And now, the nftables mode has the same
performance as IPVS mode (actually, slightly better), without any of
the downsides:

> ![kube-proxy ipvs-vs-nftables first packet latency, at various percentiles, in clusters of various sizes](ipvs-vs-nftables.png)

Reviewer 2: `.svg` too?

---
layout: blog
title: "NFTables mode for kube-proxy"

> date: 2024-08-21

Author: oops, that date came from the original unfinished blog post for 1.31 (#46969).

I assume I can't just pick any date I want? I figured sig-docs would give me one...

> date: 2024-08-21

Reviewer 3: If you mark it draft, any future date is good. We'll put in a follow up PR to trigger publication.

slug: nftables-kube-proxy
author: >
  Dan Winship (Red Hat)
---

A new nftables mode for kube-proxy was introduced as an alpha feature

> in Kubernetes 1.29. Currently in beta, it will officially be GA as of

Author: I was not planning for the post to go out until after https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/129653 merged. (Or would I need to hedge my bets even then, since theoretically it could be reverted?)

> in Kubernetes 1.29. Currently in beta, it will officially be GA as of

Reviewer 3: Even then.

1.33. The new mode fixes long-standing performance problems with the
iptables mode and is now recommended for most users running on systems
with reasonably-recent kernels. (For compatibility reasons, even once
nftables becomes GA, iptables will still be the _default_.)

## Why NFTables? Part 1: Data Plane Latency

The iptables API was designed for implementing simple firewalls, and
has problems scaling up to support service proxying in a large
Kubernetes cluster with tens of thousands of services.

In general, the ruleset generated by kube-proxy in iptables mode has a
number of iptables rules proportional to the sum of the number of

> services and the total number of endpoints. In particular, at the "top
> level" of the ruleset, there is one rule to test each possible service

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
services and the total number of endpoints. In particular, at the top
level of the ruleset, there is one rule to test each possible service
```

IP (and port) that a packet might be addressed to:

```
# If the packet is addressed to 172.30.0.41:80, then jump to the chain
# KUBE-SVC-XPGD46QRK7WJZT7O for further processing
-A KUBE-SERVICES -m comment --comment "namespace1/service1:p80 cluster IP" -m tcp -p tcp -d 172.30.0.41 --dport 80 -j KUBE-SVC-XPGD46QRK7WJZT7O

# If the packet is addressed to 172.30.0.42:443, then...
-A KUBE-SERVICES -m comment --comment "namespace2/service2:p443 cluster IP" -m tcp -p tcp -d 172.30.0.42 --dport 443 -j KUBE-SVC-GNZBNJ2PO5MGZ6GT

# etc...
-A KUBE-SERVICES -m comment --comment "namespace3/service3:p80 cluster IP" -m tcp -p tcp -d 172.30.0.43 --dport 80 -j KUBE-SVC-X27LE4BHSL4DOUIK
```

This means that when a packet comes in, the time it takes the kernel
to check it against all of the service rules is **O(n)** in the number
of services. As the number of services increases, both the average and
the worst-case latency for the first packet of a new connection

> increases (with the difference between "best-case", "average", and
> "worst-case" being mostly determined by whether a given service IP

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
increases (with the difference between best-case, average, and
worst-case being mostly determined by whether a given service IP address
```

Reviewer 3: OK, so: explain that in parens, maybe? The quotes don't convey that.

You could use italics if you prefer; try not to use quoting.

                             ... }
        }

        # Now we just need a single rule to process all packets matching an
        # element in the map. (This rule says, "construct a tuple from the
        # destination IP address, layer 4 protocol, and destination port; look
        # that tuple up in "service-ips"; and if there's a match, execute the
        # associated verdict.)
	chain services {
		ip daddr . meta l4proto . th dport vmap @service-ips
	}

        ...
}
```

Since there's only a single rule, with a roughly **O(1)** map lookup,
packet processing time is more or less constant regardless of cluster
size, and the best/average/worst cases are very similar:

![kube-proxy nftables first packet latency, at various percentiles, in clusters of various sizes (raw data available at link below)](nftables-only.svg)

But note the huge difference in the vertical scale between the
iptables and nftables graphs! In the clusters with 5000 and 10,000
services, the average (p50) latency for nftables is about the same as
the best-case (p01) latency for iptables. In the 30,000 service
cluster, the _worst-case_ latency for nftables manages to beat out the

> _best-case_ latency for iptables by a few microseconds! We can combine

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
_best-case_ latency for iptables by a few microseconds! I can combine
```

the two graphs, but you may have to squint to see the nftables
results!:

![kube-proxy iptables-vs-nftables first packet latency, at various percentiles, in clusters of various sizes](iptables-vs-nftables.svg)

## Why NFTables? Part 2: Control Plane Latency

While the improvements to data plane latency in large clusters are
great, there's another problem with iptables kube-proxy that often
keeps users from even being able to grow their clusters to that size:
the time it takes kube-proxy to program new iptables rules when
services and endpoints change.

> With both iptables and nftables, the total size of the "ruleset" as a
> whole (actual "rules", plus associated data) is **O(n)** in the combined

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With both iptables and nftables, the total size of the _ruleset_ as a
whole (actual _rules_ plus associated data) is **O(n)** in the combined
```

> number of services and endpoints. Originally, the iptables backend would

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
number of Services and their endpoints. Originally, the iptables backend would
```

rewrite every rule on every update, and with tens of thousands of
services, this could grow to be hundreds of thousands of iptables rules.
Starting in Kubernetes 1.26, we began improving kube-proxy so that it
could skip updating _most_ of the unchanged rules in each update, but
the limitations of `iptables-restore` as an API meant that it was still
always necessary to send an update that's **O(n)** in the number of
services (though with a noticeably smaller constant than it used to be).
Even with those optimizations, it can still be necessary to make use of
kube-proxy's `minSyncPeriod` config option to ensure that it doesn't
spend every waking second trying to push iptables updates.

The nftables APIs allow for doing much more incremental updates, and
when kube-proxy in nftables mode does an update, the size of the

> update is only **O(n)** in the number of services and endpoints that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
update is only **O(n)** in the number of Services and endpoints that
```

have changed since the last sync, regardless of the total number of
services and endpoints. The fact that the nftables API allows each
nftables-using component to have its own private table also means that
there is no global lock contention between components like with
iptables. As a result, kube-proxy's nftables updates can be done much
more efficiently than with iptables.

(Unfortunately I don't have cool graphs for this part.)

> ## Why _not_ NFTables?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Why _not_ nftables? {#why-not-nftables}
```

All that said, there are a few reasons why you might not want to jump
right into using the nftables backend for now.

First, while kube-proxy's nftables mode behaves very similarly to the
iptables mode at a high level (since both APIs speak to the same
underlying kernel subsystem), it's still possible that some existing
network plugins that work with kube-proxy in iptables mode might not
work right with it in nftables mode; you should consult the
documentation (or forums, bug tracker, etc.) for your network plugin to
see if it supports nftables mode. (Note that some plugins may not need
any changes; as long as they don't try to directly interact with or
override kube-proxy's iptables rules, they shouldn't care whether
kube-proxy is using iptables or nftables.)

Second, the nftables mode will not work on older Linux distributions;
currently it requires a 5.13 or newer kernel. Additionally, because of
bugs in early versions of the `nft` command line tool, you should not

> run kube-proxy in nftables mode on nodes that have a pre-"1.0.0" version

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
run kube-proxy in nftables mode on nodes that have a older (earlier than 1.0.0)
```

[how to pass a `KubeProxyConfiguration` to `kubeadm init`]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/control-plane-flags/#customizing-kube-proxy
[deploy nftables-based clusters with `kind`]: https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/configuration/#kube-proxy-mode

## Future Plans

As mentioned above, while nftables is now the _best_ kube-proxy mode,
it is not the _default_, and we do not yet have a plan for changing
that. We will continue to support the iptables mode for a long time.

The future of the IPVS mode of kube-proxy is less certain: its main
advantage over iptables was that it was faster, but certain aspects of
the IPVS architecture and APIs were awkward for kube-proxy's purposes
(for example, the fact that the `kube-ipvs0` device needs to have
_every_ service IP address assigned to it), and some parts of
Kubernetes service proxying semantics were difficult to implement
using IPVS (particularly the fact that some services had to have
different endpoints depending on whether you connected to them from a
local or remote client). And now, the nftables mode has the same
performance as IPVS mode (actually, slightly better), without any of
the downsides:

> ![kube-proxy ipvs-vs-nftables first packet latency, at various percentiles, in clusters of various sizes](ipvs-vs-nftables.svg)

Reviewer 3: Ideally, use a [`figure`](https://gohugo.io/content-management/shortcodes/#figure) shortcode here.

(In theory the IPVS mode also has the advantage of being able to use
various other IPVS functionality, like alternative "schedulers" for
balancing endpoints. In practice, this ended up not being very useful,
because kube-proxy runs independently on every node, and the IPVS
schedulers on each node had no way of sharing their state with the
proxies on other nodes, thus thwarting the effort to balance traffic
more cleverly.)

> While we do not have an immediate plan to drop the IPVS backend, it is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While the Kubernetes project does not have an immediate plan to drop the IPVS backend, it is
```
